<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Foreword</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="foreword" epub:type="z3998:chapter">
			<div about="#mwt4" class="prp-pages-output" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" xml:lang="en">
				<span>
					<span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" data-page-index="13" data-page-name="Page:In Darkest London (Chesterton 1926 2nd ed).pdf/13" data-page-number="11" data-page-quality="4" id="id-11" title="Page:In_Darkest_London_(Chesterton_1926_2nd_ed).pdf/13"/>
				</span>
				<div class="tiInherit wst-center">
					<p>
						<span style="font-size:144%;">FOREWORD</span>
					</p>
				</div>
				<p>It is continually being said—with that fatal facility which obscures the truth beyond all hope of recognition—that for a woman who is willing to work, employment can always be found. Dislike of effort—bone laziness it is called—a vagabond love of a shiftless life, an ingrained determination to live on other people's generosity; these are some of the reasons advanced for destitution.</p>
				<p>I have never believed in these glib assertions. I have always known that things were very different, and I determined to put my belief to the test. I decided to see what would happen if I started from zero with nothing but my personality to stand on. In the course of my travels I met with many adventures and amazing kindliness; but over and above all this, I proved beyond the shadow of a doubt that for a woman to get employment, in any recognised calling, without reference or status of some sort, is tragically impossible.</p>
				<p>How then does the outcast live?</p>
				<p>I have answered the question, in some degree at least, in these pages.</p>
				<div class="wst-right">
					<p>
						<span class="smallcaps" style="font-variant:small-caps;">The Author.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
